Quiz 1:
01) Which distribution does Alma Linux derive from?
	a) Red Hat Enterprise Linux
02) How does "Free Software" differ from "Open Source"?
	d) One is about freedom and the other is about a development model
03) What will typically be the default editor if the EDITOR environment variable is not set?
	d) vi
04) Who started the GNU Project, started the Free Software Foundation and wrote the GPL?
	b) Richard M. Stallman
05) In what directory are global configuration files stored?
	d) /etc
06) Does the root user have a home directory? (Hint: If unsure, look in /etc/passwd)
	b) Yes, /root
07) What makes a file or directory "hidden" from the perspective of ls?
	a) The dirs/files that begin with a dot (.) 
08) Which Linux distribution does Canonical’s Ubuntu derive from?
	a) Debian 
09) What directory contains virtual dirs and files that are a glimpse into the kernel's brain?
	c) /proc 
10) How many partitions can the default GPT partition table hold?
	b) 128
11) What three Linux distributions do most other distributions derive from?
	d) Debian, Red Hat and Slackware
12) One fault of RAID 0 is...
	b) If any drive in the RAID goes bad, all data is lost
13) How many Linux distributions are there?
	d) 500 or more
14) Which program is used to format an existing partition with a filesystem?
	a) mkfs.{fstype}
15) Where is the user's encrypted password stored?
	b) /etc/shadow
16) What kind of partition lets you get past the 4 primary partition limit of MBR/ms-dos?
	a) Extended 
17) Man page section 1 contains what type of man pages?
	c) Executable programs or shell commands
18) What do you type on the keyboard to start a search in the less screen reader?
	a) /
19) What day did the UNIX universe start? (aka EPOCH time)
	b) January 1st, 1970
20) Who is the creator of Minix, a former long-time CS professor and text-book author?
	b) Andrew S. Tanenbaum

Quiz 2:
01) Which is NOT true about systemd?
	c) It uses large shell scripts for service unit files (.service)
02) 0644 represents which of the following set of permissions?
	b) rw-r--r-- 
03) rpm can do all of the following EXCEPT...
	a) Resolve and download all dependencies for package installs
04) The /etc/passwd file is world readable.
	a) True
05) Which command is used to set / change the immutable bit?
	d) chattr
06) What kill signal is used to assassinate a crashed program?
	b) 9 
07) rpm stands for...
	b) Rpm Package Manager
08) Which process management application is the most interactive?
	c) top
09) All are true about bash EXCEPT...
	d) It is a single-tasking shell
10) All of the following are fields in /etc/passwd except...
	d) Disk Quota
11) What is the systemd binary used to manage services?
	c) systemctl 
12) What configuration file can be used to limit a number of user and group resources?
	a) /etc/security/limits.conf 
13) cgroups are a process scheduling entity used automatically by which init system?
	b) systemd
14) What is the default signal sent by the kill command?
	d) 15
15) In octal notation, which value represents write?
	b) 2 
16) In what directory are the dnf repository definition (.repo) files stored?
	c) /etc/yum.repos.d/
17) Which command is used to change permissions on files?
	a) chmod
18) Which systemd target represents text-based / console login?
	b) multi-user.target
19) A user can change the ownership of their own files with the chown command.
	b) False
20) What are the two main types of devices found in the /dev directory?
	c) block and character

Quiz 3:
01) What port does https typically run on? (Hint: If unsure, look in /etc/services)
	d) 443
02) Network Manager can be used to configure wifi connections.
	True
03) The J flag of the tar command provides what compression type?
	c) xz 
04) Which command is used to check and modify firewalld settings?
	b) firewall-cmd 
05) All of the following programs are part of the bind-utils package except...
	a) whois
06) The following details are needed for manual network configuration except...
	d) DHCP server
07) The Linux kernel has a new version released about every 2.5 months. (Homework 4)
	True 
08) /etc/hosts is consulted for what type of information?
	d) IP to hostname mapping
09) Network Manager only has a CLI-based client.
	False
10) Which file provides a list of common ports and services?
	b) /etc/services
11) If a new Linux kernel package is installed, you need to reboot to use the newer kernel?
	True 
12) Which of the following tools provides a forensic complete copy of every disk sector?
	b) dd and ddrescue
13) firewalld’s config files are all .xml file based.
	True 
14) If an IP-to-hostname entry is found in /etc/hosts, an external DNS query is still done.
	False
15) Which tool would you use to configure the network that provides a text user interface?
	d) nmtui
16) What do you run on a Red Hat-based system to check for, download and install updates?
	a) dnf update 
17) Where is the nameserver configuration set?
	d) /etc/resolv.conf
18) On subsequent runs, rsync will only transfer changed files and then often only the changed pieces.
	True 
19) Which compression program/library currently offers the best balance of speed and compression?
	d) zstd
20) Network filtering done within the Linux kernel only inspects packet headers and not the data payload section.
	True
	
Quiz 4:
01) Whenever you make changes to the /etc/aliases file, what you do need to do for the changes
to apply?
	b) Run newaliases
02) Where does the system store a user's inbound mail (inbox)?
	b) /var/spool/mail/$SUPERNAME
03) By default postfix will accept SMTP connections from localhost AND outside hosts.
	false
04) By default, most service accounts have their email redirected to the root account.
Hint: If unsure, look in /etc/aliases
	True
05) What file in a user's home directory acts as a user-specific configuration file for email?
	b) .forward
06) Each user’s inbox is a flat text file.
	True
07) What Apache config item sets the file that will be served if no specific file is requested by
the client?
	b) DirectoryIndex
08) /etc/httpd/conf.d/welcome.conf contains info on how to make the welcome page go away.
	True
09) What is the main Apache configuration file as configured by Red Hat/AlmaLinux?
	c) /etc/httpd/conf/httpd.conf
10) What project did the Apache developers come from prior to starting Apache?
	b) NCSA HTTPd
11) What is the default Apache DocumentRoot as configured by Red Hat/AlmaLinux?
Hint: If unsure, perhaps grep the main apache config for the keyword
	d) /var/www/html/
12) What is the default directory for UserDirs as configured by Red Hat / AlmaLinux?
	d)~/public_html/
13) Where does MariaDB store its database files?
	c) /var/lib/mysql/
14) The mariadb text-based client uses the -h flag for what purpose?
	a) Specifices what host to connect to
15) MariaDB uses its own internal accounts rather than system accounts for database access.
	True
16) Who bought MySQL AB in 2008 for approximately $1,000,000,000.00?
	a) Sun Microsystems
17) mysqldump without any output flags nor redirection, outputs in what format?
	d) Text in the form of SQL statements to standard output
18) What file is consulted first and as an alternative to a DNS query?
	d) /etc/hosts
19) What is the main bind configuration file?
	a) /etc/named.conf
20) Changes to a DNS zone record are not noticed on the secondary unless what is updated?
	b) The zone record serial number

Quiz 5:
01) KVM is a native feature of the mainline Linux kernel via kernel modules.
	True
02) Which KVM tool is command line based?
	c) virsh
03) What year did VMware release their first virtualization product?
	b) 1999
04) VirtualBox is a bare-metal (type 1) hypervisor.
	False
05) KVM requires hardware support for virtualization in the CPU.
	True
06) Which company originally created KVM in 2007?
	a) Qumranet
07) OpenVZ is what type of virtualization?
	d) System Containers
08) All of the following are true except...
	c) OpenVZ is being considered by the mainline kernel developers for inclusion
09) All of the following are true about a container OS Template/image except...
	b) You "boot it" just like installation media on a physical machine
10) What decade did IBM start putting virtualization features in their hardware?
	a) 1960s
